docs: update reference architecture: glossary, scale tests methodology (#12438)
coder/coder: docs/admin/reference-architectures.md

# Reference architectures

This document provides prescriptive solutions and reference architectures to
support successful deployments of up to 2000 users and outlines at a high-level
the methodology currently used to scale-test Coder.

## General concepts

This section outlines core concepts and terminology essential for understanding
Coder's architecture and deployment strategies.

### Administrator

An administrator is a user role within the Coder platform with elevated
privileges. Admins have access to administrative functions such as user
management, template definitions, insights, and deployment configuration.

### Coder

Coder, also known as _coderd_, is the main service recommended for deployment
with multiple replicas to ensure high availability. It provides an API for
managing workspaces and templates. Each _coderd_ replica has the capability to

> host multiple provisioners (`provisionerd`).

Reviewer: Link to section?

Author: Done

build, and run code. Workspaces are fully configurable and can be tailored to
specific project requirements, providing developers with a consistent and
efficient development environment. Workspaces can be autostarted and
autostopped, enabling efficient resource management.

Users can connect to workspaces using SSH or via workspace applications like
`code-server`, facilitating collaboration and remote access. Additionally,
workspaces can be parameterized, allowing users to customize settings and
configurations based on their unique needs. Workspaces are instantiated using
Coder templates and deployed on resources created by provisioners.

### Template

A template in Coder is a predefined configuration for creating workspaces.
Templates streamline the process of workspace creation by providing
pre-configured settings, tooling, and dependencies. They are built by template
administrators on top of Terraform, allowing for efficient management of
infrastructure resources. Additionally, templates can utilize Coder modules to
leverage existing features shared with other templates, enhancing flexibility
and consistency across deployments. Templates describe provisioning rules for

> infrastructure resources offered by cloud providers.

Reviewer: s/cloud/Terraform/ ? I feel like we shouldn't constrain this statement to cloud providers only.

Author: Yeah, good call. _Terraform_ would fit better here.

> ### Proxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Workspace Proxy
```

Author: Fixed

A workspace proxy serves as a relay connection option for developers connecting
to their workspace over SSH, a workspace app, or through port forwarding. It
helps reduce network latency for geo-distributed teams by minimizing the
distance network traffic needs to travel. Notably, workspace proxies do not
handle dashboard connections or API calls.

### Provisioner

Provisioners in Coder execute Terraform during workspace and template builds.
While the platform includes built-in provisioner daemons by default, there are
advantages to employing external provisioners. These external daemons provide

> secure build environments, and reduce server load, improving performance and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
secure build environments and reduce server load, improving performance and
```
This comma looked a bit off to me, maybe it was ok grammatically, though, dunno.

Author: Fixed

scalability. Each provisioner can handle a single concurrent workspace build,
allowing for efficient resource allocation and workload management.

### Registry

The Coder Registry hosts starter templates for various cloud providers and
orchestration platforms, enabling self-service cloud development environments

> via Terraform-defined infrastructure. Additionally, Coder introduces _Modules_

Author: Reworded this section 👍

to streamline template creation by extracting commonly used functionalities such
as web IDEs, third-party integrations, and helper scripts into reusable
components.

> The Registry is hosted service and it is not available for air-gapped

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Registry is a hosted service and it is not available for air-gapped
```

Author: Fixed

deployments.

> ## Scale tests methodology

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Scale-testing methodology
```

Author: Fixed

> Scaling Coder involves careful planning and testing to ensure it can handle more

Reviewer: s/careful//? Mainly I worry we make it seem _hard_ to configure Coder correctly. 😅

Author: Fixed

setup, traffic projections, and aggressive testing to identify and mitigate
potential bottlenecks.

A dedicated cluster for Coder is Kubernetes cluster specifically configured to
host and manage Coder workloads. Kubernetes provides container orchestration
capabilities, allowing Coder to efficiently deploy, scale, and manage workspaces
across a distributed infrastructure. This ensures high availability, fault
tolerance, and scalability for Coder deployments. The cluster can be deployed
using the Helm chart.

Our scale tests include the following stages:

1. Prepare environment: create expected users and provision workspaces.

2. Dashboard evaluation: verify the responsiveness and stability of Coder
   dashboards under varying load conditions. This is achieved by simulating user
   interactions using instances of headless Chromium browsers.

3. SSH connections: establish user connections with agents, verifying their
   ability to echo back received content.

4. Workspace application traffic: assess the handling of user connections with
   specific workspace apps, confirming their capability to echo back received

>    content effectively.

Reviewer: Order doesn't really matter, but it's usually SSH -> web term -> ws app -> dashboard.

5. Cleanup: delete workspaces and users created in step 1.

### Infrastructure and setup requirements

In a single workflow, the scale tests runner evenly spreads out the workload

> like this:

Author: @johnstcn Thank you for proofreading! I'm curious if we need to explain this scale tests model a bit. Scale tests are performed in stages (SSH, Web Terminal, apps), but here we claim that this is continuous traffic. WDYT?

Reviewer 2: This is probably a good follow-up PR.

Also @mafredri correct me if I'm wrong, but it is both continuous and in stages, correct?

```
     | T0 | T1 | T2 | T3 |
SSH  |  X |  X |  X |  X |
PTY  |    |  X |  X |  X |
APP  |    |    |  X |  X |
CHRO |    |    |    |  X |
```

Also, this is a configurable parameter on the template.

Reviewer: Yeah, that's right @johnstcn, although I'd expand the table:

```
     | T0 | T1 | T2 | T3 | T4 | T5 | T6 |
SSH  |  X |  X |  X |  X |    |    |    |
PTY  |    |  X |  X |  X |  X |    |    |
APP  |    |    |  X |  X |  X |  X |    |
CHRO |    |    |    |  X |  X |  X |  X |
```

Author: Thanks, rephrased it and added the table 👍 !

- 80% of users open and utilize SSH connections.
- 25% of users connect to the workspace using the Web Terminal.
- 40% of users simulate traffic for workspace apps.
- 20% of users interact with the Coder UI via a headless browser.

This distribution closely mirrors natural user behavior, as observed among our

> customers.

Reviewer: A big reason for the high SSH rating is that vs code and jetbrains are used over SSH. Maybe we can point this out as well?

Author: Done 👍

The basic setup of scale tests environment involves:

1. Scale tests runner (32 vCPU, 128 GB RAM)
2. Coder: 2 replicas (4 vCPU, 16 GB RAM)

> 3. Database: 1 replica (2 vCPU, 32 GB RAM)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Database: 1 instance (2 vCPU, 32 GB RAM)
```
(Replica is not an option here.)

Author: Fixed

4. Provisioner: 50 instances (0.5 vCPU, 512 MB RAM)

The test is deemed successful if no crashes or restarts of `coderd` or other

> internal errors were observed.

Author: > And users didn't experience interrupts in their workflows

Added

> like "less than 2% of users had issues" == ok.

Agree, let's change the game rules in the future 👍

### Traffic Projections

In our scale tests, we simulate activity from 2000 users, 2000 workspaces, and
2000 agents, with two items of workspace agent metadata being sent every 10
seconds. Here are the resulting metrics:

Coder:

- Median CPU usage for _coderd_: 3 vCPU, peaking at 3.7 vCPU during dashboard
  tests.
- Median API request rate: 350 req/s during dashboard tests, 250 req/s during
  Web Terminal and workspace apps tests.
- 2000 agent API connections with latency: p90 at 60 ms, p95 at 220 ms.
- on average 2400 Web Socket connections during dashboard tests.

Provisionerd:

- Median CPU usage is 0.35 vCPU during workspace provisioning.

Database:

> - Median CPU utilization: 80%.

Author: Done 👍

While the platform includes built-in provisioner daemons by default, there are
advantages to employing external provisioners. These external daemons provide
secure build environments, and reduce server load, improving performance and
scalability. Each provisioner can handle a single concurrent workspace build,
allowing for efficient resource allocation and workload management.

### Registry

The Coder Registry hosts starter templates for various cloud providers and
orchestration platforms, enabling self-service cloud development environments
via Terraform-defined infrastructure. Additionally, Coder introduces _Modules_
to streamline template creation by extracting commonly used functionalities such
as web IDEs, third-party integrations, and helper scripts into reusable
components.

The Registry is hosted service and it is not available for air-gapped
deployments.

## Scale tests methodology

Scaling Coder involves careful planning and testing to ensure it can handle more
users without slowing down. This process encompasses infrastructure setup,
traffic projections, and aggressive testing to identify and mitigate potential
bottlenecks.

> A dedicated cluster for Coder is Kubernetes cluster specifically configured to

Reviewer 2: Sorry, missed this:

```suggestion
A dedicated Kubernetes cluster for Coder is specifically configured to
```

host and manage Coder workloads. Kubernetes provides container orchestration
capabilities, allowing Coder to efficiently deploy, scale, and manage workspaces
across a distributed infrastructure. This ensures high availability, fault

> tolerance, and scalability for Coder deployments. The cluster can be deployed
> using the Helm chart.

Reviewer 2: I'm assuming you mean the Coder deployment? Or do you mean the actual underlying cluster?

```suggestion
tolerance, and scalability for Coder deployments. Coder is deployed
on this cluster using the [Helm chart](../install/kubernetes#install-coder-with-helm).
```

Author: Fixed

# Reference architectures

> As Coder evolves to meet the demands of modern development workflows, ensuring
> scalability is paramount. Today, we're stress-testing our platform with 2000
> concurrent users, preparing for deployments of up to 5000 users. This
> documentation provides prescriptive solutions and reference architectures to
> support successful customer deployments.

Reviewer 2: Could be simplified:

```suggestion
This document provides prescriptive solutions and reference architectures
to support successful deployments of up to 2000 users and outlines at a
high-level the methodology currently used to scale-test Coder.
```

Author: Fixed

> Let's dive into the core concepts and terminology essential for understanding
> Coder's architecture and deployment strategies.
> 
> ## General concepts
> 

Reviewer 2: move closer to usage, simplify

```suggestion
## General concepts

This section outlines core concepts and terminology essential for
understanding Coder's architecture and deployment strategies. 

```

Author: Fixed

### Administrator

An administrator is a user role within the Coder platform with elevated
privileges. Admins have access to administrative functions such as user
management, template definitions, insights, and deployment configuration.

### Coder

> Coder, also known as _coderd_, is the main service recommended for deployment
> with Kubernetes replicas to ensure high availability. It provides an API for
> managing workspaces and templates. Each _coderd_ replica has the capability to
> host multiple provisioners (provisionerd).

Reviewer 2: Remove Kubernetes-specific terminology

```suggestion
Coder, also known as `coderd`, is the main service recommended for deployment
with multiple replicas to ensure high availability. It provides an API for
managing workspaces and templates. Each _coderd_ replica has the capability to
host multiple provisioners (`provisionerd`).
```

Author: Fixed

### User

A user is an individual who utilizes the Coder platform to develop, test, and
deploy applications using workspaces. Users can select available templates to
provision workspaces. They interact with Coder using the web interface, the CLI
tool, or directly calling API methods.

### Workspace

A workspace refers to an isolated development environment where users can write,
build, and run code. Workspaces are fully configurable and can be tailored to
specific project requirements, providing developers with a consistent and
efficient development environment. Workspaces can be autostarted and
autostopped, enabling efficient resource management.

Users can connect to workspaces using SSH or via workspace applications like
`code-server`, facilitating collaboration and remote access. Additionally,
workspaces can be parameterized, allowing users to customize settings and
configurations based on their unique needs. Workspaces are instantiated using

> Coder templates and deployed on nodes by provisioners.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Coder templates and deployed on resources created by provisioners.
```

Author: Fixed

advantages to employing external provisioners. These external daemons provide
secure build environments, and reduce server load, improving performance and
scalability. Each provisioner can handle a single concurrent workspace build,
allowing for efficient resource allocation and workload management.

### Registry

The Coder Registry hosts starter templates for various cloud providers and
orchestration platforms, enabling self-service cloud development environments
via Terraform-defined infrastructure. Additionally, Coder introduces _Modules_
to streamline template creation by extracting commonly used functionalities such
as web IDEs, third-party integrations, and helper scripts into reusable
components.

The Registry is hosted service and it is not available for air-gapped
deployments.

### Kubernetes cluster for Coder

A dedicated cluster for Coder is Kubernetes cluster specifically configured to
host and manage Coder workloads. Kubernetes provides container orchestration
capabilities, allowing Coder to efficiently deploy, scale, and manage workspaces
across a distributed infrastructure. This ensures high availability, fault
tolerance, and scalability for Coder deployments.

> The cluster can be deployed using the Helm chart.

Reviewer 2: I would move this below into "Scale tests methodology"

Author: Fixed

## Scale tests methodology

> Scaling Coder involves careful planning and testing to ensure it can handle more
> users without slowing down. This process encompasses infrastructure setup,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Scaling Coder involves careful planning and testing to ensure it can handle more
load without compromising service. This process encompasses infrastructure setup,
```

Author: Fixed

traffic projections, and aggressive testing to identify and mitigate potential
bottlenecks.

> In our scale tests, we adopt an approach with various stages to thoroughly
> evaluate the system's performance. These stages include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our scale tests include the following stages:
```

Author: Fixed

1. Prepare environment: create expected users and provision workspaces.

2. Dashboard evaluation: verify the responsiveness and stability of Coder
   dashboards under varying load conditions. This is achieved by simulating user
   interactions using instances of headless Chromium browsers.

3. SSH connections: establish user connections with agents, verifying their
   ability to echo back received content.

4. Workspace application traffic: assess the handling of user connections with
   specific workspace apps, confirming their capability to echo back received
   content effectively.

> 5. Cleanup: clean used workspace resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Cleanup: delete workspaces and users created in step 1.
```

Author: Fixed

### Infrastructure and setup requirements

In a single workflow, the scale tests runner evenly spreads out the workload
like this:

- 80% of users open and utilize SSH connections.
- 25% of users connect to the workspace using the Web Terminal.
- 40% of users simulate traffic for workspace apps.
- 20% of users interact with the Coder UI via a headless browser.

This distribution closely mirrors natural user behavior, as observed among our
customers.

The basic setup of scale tests environment involves:

> 1. Scale tests runner: `c2d-standard-32` (32 vCPU, 128 GB RAM)

Reviewer 2: I would just include the resources here, instance type is specific to cloud provider.

```suggestion
1. Scale tests runner: (32 vCPU, 128 GB RAM)
```

Author: Fixed

2. Coder: 2 replicas (4 vCPU, 16 GB RAM)
3. Database: 1 replica (2 vCPU, 32 GB RAM)
4. Provisioner: 50 instances (0.5 vCPU, 512 MB RAM)

> No pod restarts or internal errors were observed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The test is deemed successful if no crashes or restarts of `coderd` or other internal errors were observed.
```

Author: Fixed

### Traffic Projections

> In our scale tests, we simulate activity from 2000 users, 2000 workspaces, and
> 2000 agents, with metadata being sent 2 x every 10 s. Here are the resulting
> metrics:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In our scale tests, we simulate activity from 2000 users, 2000 workspaces, and
2000 agents, with two items of workspace agent metadata being sent every 10 seconds. Here are the resulting
metrics:
```

Author: Fixed

Coder:

- Median CPU usage for _coderd_: 3 vCPU, peaking at 3.7 vCPU during dashboard
  tests.
- Median API request rate: 350 req/s during dashboard tests, 250 req/s during
  Web Terminal and workspace apps tests.
- 2000 agent API connections with latency: p90 at 60 ms, p95 at 220 ms.
- on average 2400 Web Socket connections during dashboard tests.

Provisionerd:

- Median CPU usage is 0.35 vCPU during workspace provisioning.

Database:

- Median CPU utilization: 80%.
- Median memory utilization: 40%.

> - `write_ops_count` per minute between 400 and 500 operations.

Reviewer 2: SI units

```suggestion
- `write_ops_count` between 6.7 and 8.4 operations per second.
```

Author: Fixed
